---
layout: post
title: Meet SAM
---
Advertising is both a blessing and a curse. Actually, it is more of a curse than a blessing. One one hand, it enables developers to pay for server maintenance, hosting, and monthly cloud computing payments. It also gives small businesses a chance to grow and gain more attention from customers (as well as investors). However, it does come with some downsides to the client (or consumer), especially when personalization is involved.

## Problems

**Privacy**
With the [controversy of FLoC](https://www.theverge.com/2021/3/30/22358287/privacy-ads-google-chrome-floc-cookies-cookiepocalypse-finger-printing), brings the realization that privacy may be a ["relic of the past"](https://benhalpern.com/privacy) as stated by Ben Halpern, the creator of social media platform Forem. Making personalized advertisements (from now on, I'll call it ads) usually involves some loss of privacy. The computers, whether it's done locally or through external servers, need to gather information about you to extrapolate your interests and which ads you are more likely to click on. To do this, lots and lots of personal data needs to be collected, not only from the client, but from multiple clients so that categories of people are formed and people can be placed in the category that they best fit in to be served a specific set of ads. For example, if a client's data indicates that they show interest in embedded systems engineering, then they will be binned as someone showing interest in embedded systems engineering and will be given ads selling (either software or hardware) items related to embedded systems.

Worse, that data does not get deleted in order to maintain accuracy. For example, we have a person is classified as a web developer whose' data indicates that their interests are shifting to systems programming. If the data about them being a web developer is deleted, then the algorithm will assume that this web developer is a budding systems programmer, perhaps incorrectly. On the flip side, if that data is saved, then the algorithm will more accurately assume that the person can be categorized as a web developer showing interest in systems programming. 

For the sake of accuracy and at the cost of privacy, ad services that use personalized ads collect personal user data and do not delete them.

**Security**
Personalized ads also include multiple points of failure, the client's device, and the servers (or databases) in which the personal data is located in. Take two of the biggest companies who have monopolies in the ad market, Google and Facebook. They both take and analyze data to improve their ad services. If one of were to suffer a data breach, it would be catastrophic for their user base because a lot of personal information is stored in that company's data server. 

Lack of privacy also translates to less security. The logic is that no system is impenetrable, therefore systems require a lot of personal data are inherently more dangerous because data breaches are more damaging to the client.

**UX**
**U**ser e**X**perience is also damaged by ads. An alarming number of websites have ads that consist of inescapable popups, moving elements, and lack of integration with the interface of the website. These are designed to get the attention of the client and distract them from the actual content of the website, a turnoff for the majority of users, and sometimes an accessibility problem.

**Designed Addiction**
Ads that collect data to categorize the client always need more and more data to generate a more accurate picture of them, improving the accuracy of their ads. Because these algorithms need more data, clients are needed to spend more time on that platform to collect the data. Logically, this leads to features being developed that encourage the client to spend increasing amounts of time on that platform. By encouraging users to spend more time on a specific platform, the **F**ear **O**f **M**issing **O**ut is introduced when not on that platform because others are on the same platform, doing something without the client's active involvement. At this point, through the efforts of developers, algorithms have overcome human weakness, leading to unwitting addiction.

With all these problems stated, could there be a possible solution that gives the client a well-integrated UI, and improve security and privacy because absolutely no user data is collected?

The answer say **yes**. After thinking about this issue (for about 30 minutes), I am happy to introduce a different model of advertising, the 🎉**Static Advertising Model**🎉 (SAM).

## SAM

**What?**
I see most current advertising as fluid, changing when the user changes in response to influx of data collected about the client, so I will call this the **👎Fluid Advertising Model👎** (FAM). SAM is different, it is a combination of the [Acceptable Ads Program](https://adblockplus.org/en/acceptable-ads) and a concept (that I came up with independently) called Static Advertising. It also forces the developers to style the ad's interface into something that looks more like the website.

**How?**
The Static Advertising Model takes the concept of serving the client ads based on the category that they best fit in and flips it around, serving the client ads based on the category that the website best fits in. So, if the website is about farming, then the advertisements will be about farming because farming is the topic of the website. 

**Why?**
SAM aims to be different, it ensures that the client's data is protected because it never collects any data from the client. And because this system does not need to collect data, there is no need to implement privacy disrespecting (or purposefully addictive) systems to collect data. 

**Shortcomings**
After all, nothing is perfect, not even my ideas 😢. In gaining privacy, SAM loses accuracy. Data is collected because it can provide a very detailed profile on the client. Attempting to improve SAM's precision by extrapolating which ads to serve to the client based on the previous sites visited (site history) still provides a comprehensive picture of the user, disrespecting their privacy and essentially becoming FLoC 2.0, defeating the point of SAM (no thanks).

**This sounds great, how can I use it for my website?**
Well, you can't. Creating this would require a massive amount of effort (this is an advertising system, it has got to **_scale_**) and possibly some legalese (uhh, no) that are too complicated for my simple mind, besides, building web services is outside of my skills set. I could possibly implement this later in my life, but probably not. On the other hand, if you have the skills set and time (and iron will), then I encourage you to make an implementation (and comment about it with a link to the source code). Don't forget to credit me for this idea (or not, not really my problem 🤷‍♀️). 